after an insane few months to start off
2020 I gotta say it is such a relief to
have Rick and Morty back just something
to provide a little bit of escapism you
know like every day of 2020 seems to
give us something new to worry about
first there was the super virus then the
US government basically confirmed that
aliens are real with Declassified
footage of UFOs and if all of that
wasn't enough now we're hearing about
these Asian giant Hornets massive
insects that like to decapitate and tire
beehives and kill dozens of people a
year so will you excuse me for a bit
while they both change and Hornet proof
my pants viruses aliens evil bees like I
said that is a lot to worry about and
you see that's why Rick and Morty is so
great it's a show that is so far removed
from reality that I can just sit and let
those worries go and watch wacky sci fi
adventurer's about super viruses
destroying the planet and invading alien
species and human sized wasps oh my god
our whole reality is a Rick and Morty
episode am I on the train and I on the
story
hello Internet welcome to film theory
the show that tells its passengers all
aboard Matt Pat's crazy train first stop
over analysis Junction so Rick and Morty
is back which means that I'm coming back
with some quick explainer theories on
the episodes that merit a closer look
and boy oh boy was the season for a
second half premiere titled never Ricky
Morty one that needed a bit more
explanation I mean this show has always
been meta but this episode went off the
rails in the meta Department which is
ironic considering that the whole thing
takes place on a train basically we're
given Rick and Morty stuck in a circular
looping space train that as Rick puts it
it's a story device literally a literal
literary device quite literally
metaphorically containing us to escape
the Train they basically have to break
out of the circular pattern of stories
that constitute a typical Rick and Morty
episode all without sacrificing
continuity or the integrity of the
characters they're captured by story
Lord whose goal is to milk them drive
their endless potential for story
I'll now fuel my anthology with your
limitless potential propelling it to its
final stop beyond the fifth in order to
defeat story Lord Rick has to resort to
prayer something that the characters
Rick and Morty would never do causing
the train to come to a screeching halt
because the turn to religion makes the
characters much less popular and much
less relatable it breaks story Lords
machine and they escape only to then
realize that the entire story train was
a toy something that Morty bought at the
Citadel gift shop sure he trained
available now in a citadel of Rick's
just buy it the episode ends with Rick
praising Morty for buying merchandise
which he says is the most important
thing it's a fun episode but boy does it
start to get complicated
so what does it all mean what is canon's
what is not Canada unsurprisingly the
episode is a metaphor for the difficult
cyclical nature of writing the show Rick
and Morty but when you dig a little
deeper it's actually a lot more than
that it's a really complex exploration
of how hard it is to write formulaic
stories that still manage to please
everyone
from the creators to the viewers to the
theorists to the networks and
advertisers who ultimately make the show
possible
it's a deep dive analysis so strap in
tight cuz this little caboose is
leaving the station whoa whoo this is an
episode with a lot of layers so let's
start with what's most obvious on the
outside the looping story train itself
the circular train is a reference to one
of Dan Harmon's famous writing
techniques known as his story circle
it's something that Harmon uses pretty
religiously throughout his writing
having said before that he feels like
it's tattooed in his brain the Harmon
story circle lays out the eight major
steps of a complete dramatic story and
early on in this Rick and Morty episode
were shown the blueprints for the Train
and wouldn't you know it's it's broken
up into eight parts as Rick lays out his
escape plan he even points out how the
specific beats of this episode are going
to align to certain segments of the
Train I'll have to rig us a couple of
space suits that start failing around
here so we could pay a heavy price for
re-entering at this threshold it steps 3
through 6 of the Harmon story circle the
characters get into an unfamiliar
situation they adapt to it they get what
they want but they pay a heavy price now
that kind of formula from a writing
standpoint can be a bit of a
double-edged sword on the plus side it
becomes pretty darn clear when you've
got all the elements that you need to
create a solid coherent episode but if
the formula becomes something you
absolutely have to follow every single
time you burn out your writers you limit
your ideas you become predictable to the
audience in terms of this episode
staying on the train is staying
formulaic going outside of the Train or
deep railing it completely is breaking
formula doing something drastically
different that tension of staying true
to formula but also stretching what you
can do really shows up throughout this
episode when Rick describes his plan to
fix the story trains engine Morty asks
whether they'll have to leave the Train
Rick responds with this we don't have to
do anything Morty this is just a
structural guide we're obviously gonna
impart our own style the train in and of
itself isn't a bad thing you can always
impart your own little twist on it
likewise there's always gonna be a fear
to leave the comfort of that train
because in doing so you run the risk of
alienating the viewers who have just
been enjoying the ride that strict
adherence to the formula is also what
separates a typical Rick and Morty
episode from their anthology episodes
like interdimensional cable and Morty's
mind blowers you know the ones that have
those short and random heavily
improvised vignettes so get some hints
from Rick that making anthology episodes
full of fun but with no deeper meaning
behind them would be 10
the easier stop the anthology if we
wanted one offs we do interdimensional
cable but also less satisfying here's
where the stupid vignettes were can't
imagine if that had been the whole thing
and yet when the writer's block starts
to kick in it must be tempting to want
to lean on that style because it
requires less intricate planning after
all it's not like the interdimensional
cable episodes are unpopular multiple
sites that rank Rick and Morty episodes
put the first interdimensional cable
episode rixty minutes in their top five
episodes ever Thrillist
even has it at number one but just
because the stories might be easier
doesn't necessarily mean that they're
gonna end up being faster and sometimes
the opposite which seems to be the
message of the exchange when Morty asks
Rick why a spacesuit has a timer
built-in why would you put ticking cuz
if it's too easy to get there we'll
never get there in other words the
constraints of story structure and
deadlines are challenging but ultimately
useful in determining the way the
narrative needs to go without a
thoughtful story rick and morty would
never progress and they would just
dissolve into a bunch of random gags
don't get me wrong we all love a three
cheek butt joke it's just not a
sustainable way to make a show big deal
you're probably saying at home every
writer has to think of stories big whoop
it's not worth complaining about to
which I say to you you'll run a tight
ship they're imaginary viewer who is
himself a narrative device that I'm
using to make a point is this for you
but you're also missing some of the
depth behind this issue making stories
that are thoughtful and complete is only
a small part of the total battle because
in this day and age especially for a
show as successful as Rick and Marty
writers also have to worry about
pleasing lots of different subsets of
people while making sure that those
stories fit within that framework and
that is what the rest of this episode is
about one group that the writers have to
worry about appeasing is well people
like us the fan base the theorists to
say that Rick and Morty's fanbase is
passionate is a bit of an understatement
any group of people who go bananas over
the availability or lack thereof of
chicken nugget dippin sauce is a group
that perhaps cares just a wee bit too
much but that level of passion and that
level of scrutiny puts a lot of pressure
on the creators to deliver comprehensive
answers about the world of Rick and
Morty what really sells this point home
is when Rick tosses the tickets please
guy out of the Train
Rick explicitly tells Morty that
everything outside of the Train isn't
canon
whirring nothing up there is canon but
later on in the show we have an odd
scene between two aliens one of whom
subscribes to a theory about the tickets
please guy saying this his followers
believe the entire universe is floaty
bloody man's nightmare as he dies in a
time dilated reality okay so this scene
is symbolic of people who take non-canon
information spin it into their own
theories and then adhere to those
theories as undeniable truth treating
them almost as if they were a religion
you're given a piece of information in
this case of floating torsos spinning
through space and three steps down the
line you can a wild explanation for
what it could possibly mean placing so
much emphasis and emotional importance
on it that you get it tattooed onto your
own body when in reality none of it was
canon to begin with now put me lying if
I said I hadn't made similar leaps and
logic in my interpretation of the
characters and episodes and Easter eggs
in the past I mean it's just fun to look
at puzzling things in the story as we
consume and think about what the
complete story or inspiration behind it
really is that's why you're watching
this video and hopefully while you're
subscribed to this channel if you're not
subscribed to this channel now is a
perfect time to do so because there is a
whole heck of a lot of Rick and Morty
discussion coming up over the next five
weeks it's just fun theorizing you know
and that's not what the writers are
calling out here the problem that the
writers are calling out is when those
fun theories are treated like truth when
fans get so emotionally attached to
those fabricated stories that they
create the religious set of beliefs
around them that they're not willing to
go with changes in the story direction
based on what the writers want to do
providing the level of detail to answer
every question about every backstory and
unexplained narrative not only is it
unrealistic for a writer it's impossible
to do within the confines of an episodic
structure notice how Rick literally
blows holes in the religious aliens
theory it's a pretty brilliant rebuttal
into animation to his theory on floaty
bloody man's true role in this universe
this also aligns pretty well with how
Rick and Marty staff tends to handle
outside theories Dan Harmon's said in an
interview with GQ that the writers don't
make any decision about cannon until
things actually happen in the show and
also that he avoids fan theories
completely because he'd hate to have his
own ideas corrupted by someone else's
having a rabid fan base that celebrates
and theorizes your work is a blessing
but it also puts pressure on the writers
to continue coming up with ideas that
are both unexpected while still logical
extensions
of the story for its characters on a
more personal note by the way I hope
that anyone from the Rick and Morty
staff who might be watching this episode
will find it sufficient to disprove any
of my theories through their scripts and
won't resort to ripping me in half
tossing me in space and shooting me with
laser beams don't want to go like
tickets please guy and heck I don't even
have the ABS to pull it off anyway
there's an additional element of
pressure for the writers of Rick and
Morty to navigate and that's political
correctness of all things might come as
a surprise to you but Rick and Morty and
its fandom have been on the receiving
end of a decent amount of criticism
about their exemplification of toxic
masculinity with all that baggage must
come a desire to improve the show's
image as inclusive and diverse and
that's where you get the bit about the
Bechtel test in the middle of the
episode if you're not familiar with it
the Bechtel test is a tool to measure
gender inclusivity in fiction a movie or
book or show that doesn't feature two
female characters discussing something
other than a man fails the Bechtel test
so when Morty tells an awkwardly sexist
story about his mother and sister
fighting lady scorpions with their laser
powered special time the episode
technically passes the Bechdel test but
it does it in the strangest way possible
now I don't think that this story in
this episode is meant to convey that the
makers of Rick and Morty think the
Bechtel test is dumb or somehow couldn't
fathom stories involving two women
talking about anything other than men
but rather they're trying to point out
yet another factor that the writers now
have to juggle and finally there's the
metaphor of story Lord Himself sure
story Lord as a character represents the
literal stories that Rick and Morty's
creators have to wrestle with but based
on his behavior and motives it seems
like story Lord might also represent
another entity that the makers of Rick
and Morty have to appease network
executives story Lords machine that he
locks Rick and Morty into has a number
of metrics including marketability
relatability and broad appeal that he
then attempts to maximize by stealing
stories from Rick and Morty that tap
into their limitless potential to take
them beyond the fifth wall it's not hard
to see this as an analogy for a network
or movie studio that wants to take a
successful property and milk it dry
until there's nothing left to extract it
all culminates with story Lord
menacingly asking if Rick and Morty want
to see how their story ends but this
isn't some cheeky call-out to how Rick
and Morty is
could end its a scene featuring a
showdown between an army of meeseeks
spear wielding Rick clones and
gazorpazorp sled by evil Morty and a
Palpatine esque mr. poopy butthole
against Rick and Morty and it ends with
the literal deus ex machina of Jesus
Christ coming in to save the day it's
not so much that this is how Rick and
Morty will end but more that the makers
of the show fear that'll end this way
they lose creative control over their
process and instead have to make stories
that are forced to max out relatability
marketability and broad appeal
sacrificing their integrity along the
way while that epic climactic battle
doesn't explicitly reference any series
Game of Thrones the fear of getting worn
out or having to up the stakes to a
ridiculous degree is clearly a real
worry for these writers we have to
appease the powers that be to stay on
the air notice that story Lords machine
doesn't measure quality it only measures
the metrics that will lead to a show
being successful and profitable so
finding the balance between satisfying a
network satisfying the fans while still
writing compelling challenging stories
that are creatively satisfying
complicates the entire process and that
is the question at the center of this
episode how do you please everyone how
do you bring back crowd favorites like
mr. meeseeks or birdperson or chrome Bob
Ulis Michael without sacrificing
narrative continuity how can Rick and
Morty a show with a small niche audience
be profitable without selling out the
complexity and specificity that made it
great in the first place our answer lies
in going beyond that fifth wall that
story Lord mentions in my research I've
had a few different definitions of a
fifth wall as the divide between critics
and creator or the difference between
characters and people playing on but I
don't think that's what story Lord is
meaning in this case by fifth wall Rick
and Morty has often broken the fourth
wall they have the characters
acknowledge that they're in a show but
the barrier between the narrative and
the viewer can actually be broken down
yet another step what is the purpose of
a story what is the purpose of its
characters the ultimate purpose is to
make money to sell things we're no
longer watching a narrative with
characters were watching a marketing
device called Rick and Morty meant to
sell things their own merchandise
Pringles Wendy's this results in a weird
monologue from Rick about how proud he
is of Morty for buying something
or to put it in his cynical yet
praiseworthy words you didn't ask
questions or raise ethical complaints
you you just looked straight into the
bleeding jaws of capitalism and said yes
daddy please the voice in that writing
is clearly sarcastic but the point still
stands that the success of any show
hinges on its ability to sell products
either directly or indirectly by running
ads around it notice that there is no
real cold-open for this episode I don't
know about your viewing of it but for me
it was a Windies ad for breakfast
sandwiches a Windies ad for breakfast
sandwiches that was produced by the Rick
and Morty staff at the midpoint of the
episode one of the ads was a Morty bot
eating Pringles and that's the point
that is the fifth wall the writer of the
episode Jeff loveness tweeted that this
was all about quote being trapped in the
narrative choke of capitalism which is
to say that the best stories don't
necessarily make the most money and also
the most money-making stories often
aren't the best the problem is that Rick
and Morty isn't designed to be a
number-one show Rick and Morty isn't a
warm-and-fuzzy family sitcom that can
make lots of money with safe comedy
living on a big network because it's too
cynical it's too dirty it's too nice and
too political all things that hurt the
show scores for relatability
marketability and broad appeal from
story lords machine but they also can't
suddenly shift to a formula designed for
profit because that's against the soul
of what Rick and Morty is sacrificing
the identity of the show is ultimately
parallel to just doing easily made
easily digestible anthology episodes
that don't really stand for anything
which is what Rick was complaining about
from the very beginning of the episode
and therefore I will go to story train
com to purchase the merchandise as I've
been instructed to by Rick and the link
is broken the story train that they
advertised at the end of the episode
doesn't exist
dang it and I was so mentally prepared
to help him sell out to oh well Wendy's
breakfast sandwiches we'll have to do
that biscuit did look really good if he
carries a mean plane but hey that's just
a theory a film theory of shameless
advertising next Rick and Morty episode
Tuesday the 19th will be talking portal
science with the biggest science
celebrity on the planet Neil deGrasse
Tyson that's actually coming up on
Tuesday the 19th so mark your calendars
or like I said earlier hit the subscribe
button so you're here for
honestly a huge collaboration on the
channel I'm really excited about it now
if I could only get Bill Nighy on one of
my shows then my bingo board is complete
I'll see in a few days for a new
scooby-doo theory Keanu for covering
Scooby Doo and then more Rickon warning
next week Tuesday the 19th with my new
best friend Neil deGrasse Tyson it'll be
super nerdy also super cool so hope to
see you there
[Music]